# Cluster API v1.5 compared to v1.6

This document provides an overview over relevant changes between Cluster API v1.5 and v1.6 for
maintainers of providers and consumers of our Go API.

## Go version

- The Go version used by Cluster API is Go 1.20.x

## Dependencies

**Note**: Only the most relevant dependencies are listed, `k8s.io/` and `ginkgo`/`gomega` dependencies in Cluster API are kept in sync with the versions used by `sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime`.

- sigs.k8s.io/kind: v0.20.x
- sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime: v0.15.x
- sigs.k8s.io/controller-tools: v0.12.x

## Changes by Kind

### Deprecation

### Removals

- API version `v1alpha4` is not served in v1.6 (users can enable it manually in case they are lagging behind with deprecation cycles). Important: `v1alpha4` will be completely removed in 1.7.
- The function(s):
    - `ClusterToObjectsMapper` is removed, please use `ClusterToTypedObjectsMapper` function instead.
    - `Poll` and `PollImmediate` are removed, please use utils from "k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/util/wait" instead.
- The variable `DefaultIndexes` is removed, please use `[]Index{NodeProviderIDIndex}`
- `ProviderID` type and all related methods/construct have been removed. Please see this [PR](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/8577) for a reference.

### API Changes


### Other
- `clusterctl move` can be blocked temporarily by a provider when an object to be moved is annotated with `clusterctl.cluster.x-k8s.io/block-move`.


### Suggested changes for providers

- In order to reduce dependencies for API package consumers, CAPI has diverged from the default kubebuilder scheme builder. This new pattern may also be useful for reducing dependencies in provider API packages. For more information [see the implementers guide.](../implementers-guide/create_api.md#registering-apis-in-the-scheme)