# Cluster API v1.9 compared to v1.10

This document provides an overview over relevant changes between Cluster API v1.9 and v1.10 for
maintainers of providers and consumers of our Go API.

## Go version

- The Go version used by Cluster API is Go 1.23.x

## Changes by Kind

### Deprecation

### Removals

### API Changes

### Other

- The following functions for `E2EConfig` in `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/test/framework/clusterctl` got renamed ([#11743](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/11743)):
  - `E2EConfig.GetVariable` is now `E2EConfig.MustGetVariable`
  - `E2EConfig.GetInt64PtrVariable` is now `E2EConfig.MustGetInt64PtrVariable`
  - `E2EConfig.GetInt32PtrVariable` is now `E2EConfig.MustGetInt32PtrVariable`
- Using the package `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/controllers/clustercache` in tests using envtest may require a change to properly shutdown a running clustercache. Otherwise teardown of envtest might time out and lead to failed tests. (xref [#11757](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/11757))

### Suggested changes for providers

- If you are developing a control plane provider with support for machines, please consider adding `spec.machineTemplate.readinessGates` (see [contract](../contracts/control-plane.md#controlplane-machines))
- core Cluster API added the new CRD migrator component. For more details, see: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/11894
    - CRD migration in clusterctl has been deprecated and will be removed in CAPI v1.13, so it's recommended to
      adopt the CRD migrator in providers instead.
    - Please see the examples in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/11889, the following high-level steps are required:
        - Add the `--skip-crd-migration-phases` command-line flag that allows to skip CRD migration phases
        - Setup the `CRDMigrator` component with the manager.
        - Configure all CRDs owned by your provider, only set `UseCache` for the objects for which your provider already has an informer.
        - Add the following RBAC:
      - resources: `customresourcedefinitions`, verbs: `get;list;watch`
      - resources: `customresourcedefinitions;customresourcedefinitions/status`, resourceNames: `<crd-name>`, verbs: `update;patch`
        - Note: The CRD migrator will add the `crd-migration.cluster.x-k8s.io/observed-generation` annotation on the CRD object,
                please ensure that if these CRD objects are deployed with a tool like kapp / Argo / Flux the annotation is not continuously removed.
      - For all CRs that should be migrated by the `CRDMigrator`: verbs: `get;list;watch;patch;update`
