# Cluster API v1.3 compared to v1.4

This document provides an overview over relevant changes between Cluster API v1.3 and v1.4 for
maintainers of providers and consumers of our Go API.

## Minimum Go version

- The Go version used by Cluster API is still Go 1.19.x

## Dependencies

**Note**: Only the most relevant dependencies are listed, `k8s.io/` and `ginkgo`/`gomega` dependencies in Cluster API are kept in sync with the versions used by `sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime`.

- sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime: v0.13.x => v0.14.x
- sigs.k8s.io/controller-tools: v0.10.x => v0.11.x

## Changes by Kind

### Deprecation

-

### Removals

- `clusterctl backup` has been removed.
- `clusterctl restore` has been removed.
- `api/v1beta1.MachineHealthCheckSuccededCondition` condition type has been removed.
- `controller/external/util.CloneTemplate` and `controllers/external/util.CloneTemplateInput` has been removed.
- The option `--list-images` from `clusterctl init` subcommand has been removed.
- `exp/runtime/server.NewServer` has been removed.
- `--disable-no-echo` option from `clusterctl describe cluster` subcommand has been removed
- `api/v1beta1.ClusterTopologyManagedFieldsAnnotation` field has been removed.
- `api/v1beta1.PopulateDefaultsMachineDeployment` func has been removed.

### API Changes

- `Backup(options BackupOptions) error` in the Client interface has been removed.
- `Restore(options RestoreOptions) error` in the Client interface has been removed.

### Other

- `clusterctl upgrade apply` no longer requires a namespace when updating providers. It is now optional and in a future release it will be deprecated. The new syntax is `[namespace/]provider:version`.
- `WatchDeploymentLogs` is changed to `WatchDeploymentLogsByName`, it works same as before. Another function `WatchDeploymentLogsByLabelSelector` is added to stream logs of deployment by label selector.
- Cluster API controllers are now using an explicit security context by default.
- It is recommended to drop usages of `logs.AddFlags(fs, logs.SkipLoggingConfigurationFlags())`. It was previously used to configure deprecated logging flags, but with the bump to component-base
  `v0.26.0` this function is not configuring any flags anymore.
  Please note that the following logging flags have been removed: (in `component-base`, but this affects all CAPI controllers): `--add-dir-header`, `--alsologtostderr`, `--log-backtrace-at`,
  `--log-dir`, `--log-file`, `--log-file-max-size`, `--logtostderr`, `--one-output`, `--skip-headers`, `--skip-log-headers` and `--stderrthreshold`.
  For more information, please see: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2845

### Suggested changes for providers

- Providers should add an explicit security context to their controllers deployment, see [#7831](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/7831) for reference.
